The history of the island, there's probably good
documentation of the history. But there's not
much documentation of the government role in the
history. The government just was not there. I
mean, it was extremely corrupt. It was extremely
non-professional until the late, late 50s or 60s.
So you didn't have a situation like many other
communities would have when it was more of a
planning presence. Of course, the natural
disaster they had there in the hurricane at the
turn of the century was responsible for the
seawall and some other things they did. It was also
responsible for the demise of Galveston because
the principal of Galveston never really
recovered from that. They were the major city in
Texas at that time. And after that hurricane, the
damage and the deaths that resulted from that,
investments didn't really come back to
Galveston.
Well, let's see if we can find some more things. How
have the following influences affected planning
in the community? Ethnic. Has there been much of an
ethnic impact? Galveston's, well, ethnicity, if
you look at race, for example, probably close to
40% of Galveston is black. And it's, in a sense,
almost a ghetto, because those people live in one
small area in Galveston. And they're not spread
out. To me, it was important to do the planning for
those areas. We did have some areas that were low
income that didn't necessarily have historical
structures. The poverty level was such that those
structures had long since been destroyed. And the
historical value and ability to restore them
didn't really exist.
During the latter part of the time I was there,
there was a kind of awakening in the black
community to some extent. There was not much
support for neighborhood planning at that time. I
went into one of the more advanced higher income
levels to do the first neighborhood plan, East End
neighborhood. The second neighborhood was gonna
be the black community. We did have a group come in
and receive a grant. from the city under the
Community Development Block Grant to do a
neighborhood plan for one of the black
neighborhoods. But that was done more as a
political payoff. The manager told me, we need to
support this group. And they need the money. And
this is our way of showing it. Because they weren't
competent. They weren't qualified to do it. And I
was very disturbed and disappointed to see that
money being wasted in it. In my way of thinking, the
worst thing you can do is do a bad planning project.
You're better off doing no planning project. That
project eventually failed. The consultants did
not produce a report. And the city staff had to come
back in here and save that program. But a couple of
people at that time brought in, gosh, I can't
remember his name, from Cincinnati.
Gosh, I can't remember his name. Very well known
black man who had been able to revitalize part of
Cincinnati. I wish I remember his name. I'm
disappointed for not knowing that. He wanted to
create a neighborhood housing service program.
He wanted to kind of a bootstrap operation. And
there were some people in the black community that
were very sympathetic to what he had to say. And I
think there was a renewal or an awakening of the
political aspects of this. And a couple of, in
fact, I think as I was leaving a black community,
P.J. Thomas, maybe, I don't remember his name for
sure, but a black man was appointed to our council,
or our commission, rather. And now I understand
there is a, last time I was down there in Galveston,
one of the councilmen was black, and it used to be
all Anglo, all male. And the first year I was down
there, they had one woman in the council, and they
now have a woman running for mayor at this time, who
was a strong advocate of planning, that I knew when
I was down there, she was one of the
behind-the-scenes folks that I worked with and
tried to give her ammunition to use in her
interest. And she ran several years ago for
council and was elected. She'll be a good mayor.
But I think there was kind of an awakening there.
The black community was almost invisible. It's
hard to believe that with a population of that
level that they would be invisible. But they were.
They were visible politically. They were
invisible in the culture and in the very life of the
city. You didn't see black people in Galveston
Island. You didn't see them on the beaches. You
didn't see them in the stores and shops. I knew how
many blacks there were supposed to be there from
the census. But it didn't take me very long before I
wondered where on earth they were at. You just did
not see the minority community on that island when
I was there. Well, why don't we take a divergence
from
Galveston and talk a little bit about Corpus
Christi. Talk about Corpus. Corpus, you know, I
hope in the oral histories here that somebody, and
I assume they have it, talked to Bill Anderson. I
got there just after Bill Anderson retired. One of
the biggest disappointments in my life. One
reason I had been going to Galveston was that he was
down there. He was there for 25 years. It's a
well-planned city because of that continued
presence on his part there. I was hired as a senior
planner. I had the responsibility for revising
and updating their zoning ordinance. That was my
initial responsibility. Simon Eisner, a
national consultant, had been hired to draft, or
really to analyze, the deficiencies in the city's
zoning ordinance. It was a Harlem Bartholomew
ordinance they had. And he reviewed it, produced
an 80-, 90-page, 100-page report on changes that
needed to be made. The city's strategy was to,
rather than just make all those changes at one
time, it was to work its way through those changes.
Simon Eisner probably would have done that under
his consulting agreement, but he had a running
with the city manager, Marvin Townsend, at the
council meeting where he, in essence, lectured
the city manager for being rude and insensitive to
the planning director at a public hearing. This is
a unique situation. Marvin Townsend was a very
strong, loyal city manager, ruled the city of
Galveston with an iron fist, an iron hand, Bill
Anderson, the planning director, was one of the
few people who he did not control, who had some
ability to have freedom to express themselves to
the council. A sense of threat to the manager, if
you wanted to look at it in a negative sense to him.
But at one of the council meetings where Simon
Eisner was in attendance presenting this
ordinance, a planning matter came up and the
planning director had spoken on something.
Marvin Townsend got up and told the council that
the planning director didn't know what he was
talking about, that he was wrong in this matter,
and he was really not paying attention to him. It
was a real put-down. Well, at some time before that
meeting was over, when Simon Eisner got up to talk
about his consultant report, he proceeded to
lecture the council and the manager about the
impropriety of a manager saying the things he had
said to the planning director, questioning the
planning director's judgment in doing so in the
situation that was done. Townsend
didn't use a lot of tact in that kind of situation
when he was dealing with this department here. And
he publicly humiliated the planning director and
chastised him. And Eisner just lectured down the
city manager for having done that. Nobody talks
like that to the city manager, to Marvin Townsend.
So at the end of that meeting, Mr. Townsend, former
planning director, that Mr. Eisner was no longer
welcome at Corpus Christi. He didn't want to see
his face again. And so that's why Simon Eisner
never finished that. Well, anyway, I was hired.
For about a year, I worked through some of these
changes in the ordinance. We were able to make a
good many of them. We had a 701 planning program. It
was not doing well. The staff in charge of it really
did not know what they were doing. And they were
floundering. And the head of the program resigned
and left. And at that point, then they asked me if I
would be willing to do that job, run the 701 program
as well as the zoning ordinance. And I was made to,
at that time I was a senior planner. And I was senior
planner in charge of research and development.
And the research and development was supposed to
be the zoning ordinance. But they expanded that to
include the development of the comprehensive
plan. So the next two years, two and a half years, I
ran that program with three or four other staff
people, and we produced a comprehensive plan. We
produced a land use element, a park and open space
element, a library facilities element,
utilities element, school master plan elements,
police facilities element, fire facilities
element. Basically, we produced a series of
independent reports that constituted a
comprehensive plan. We did the economic
determinants study. We did a physical
determinants study. We did a social determinants
study. These were all separate reports ranging
from one to 200 pages in size. And then we produced
all the elements of the plan. None of those
planning elements were ever presented to the city
council or the planning commission. They were
very well known technically. The housing element
was probably one of the most best illustrations,
best examples of a comprehensive plan that I've
ever been involved with. Bob Cornish had reviewed
that with us and helped us as kind of a free advisor
on certain parts of the plan. And we were
developing what TJ Kent would call a unified
summary, which was very innovative and was at the
cutting edge of planning technology at that
point. We satisfied the 701 requirements. HUD
accepted those reports. We received probably
$140,000 one year, $80,000 one year, maybe
$250,000 in federal assistance to do those plans.
It was quite substantial. Paid for these five
staff people that worked on this plan and
published and printed it. At the same time, I was
involved superficially and peripherally with
the Goals for Corpus Christi program. That was a
two-year program that was run in the direction of
John Lewis, who is now the executive director of
Goals for Dallas. John had been a member of our
planning staff. Outstanding goals program.
Again, one of the most technically sound goals
programs that I have ever read about in any
literature anywhere. We had 10,000 to 12,000
residents participate in the goals program.
outstanding, I mean, an astounding, outstanding
percentage, especially in light of the fact that
we're in a bilingual community with 40, 45% of the
community Mexican-American. So we had to do
everything with that view in mind. We're also in a
low-income area. Galveston-Corpus Christi was
148th, I believe, in the SMSAs in per capita
income. Both of those are usually impediments to
citizen participation in the GOES program,
outstanding GOES program. The city manager did
not support that GOES program. The mayor did not
support that GOES program. The response when the
results of the program were presented to the
council was great work, good try, too bad more
people didn't participate so it would have been
worthwhile. But it was worth a shot at it. It was too
bad it failed. and they just swept it away in the
closet. In essence, the city manager did the same
thing in the comprehensive plan. He did not agree
with the process that we used. He did not like
policies. He was opposed to the use of principles,
concepts, and standards. He was opposed to any
analysis which suggested that there were
deficiencies in the city of any type whatsoever.
Probably going back, he was most opposed to the
idea of the concept behind policies. He was not
interested in the city council establishing
policies. My negative biased assessment of it was
that he saw this as a threat to his authority, his
dominance over the council, his freedom to make
decisions. He buried it. He boxed them up. They
were put in a closet somewhere. And the last I heard
was they might have even been burned. He was afraid
they might following the public domain. Somebody
might come in and find them or see them or whatever
it is. But I will say in the two and a half years
there, the plan that was produced was as
technically as sound, maybe as good of an example
of what a comprehensive plan ought to be and could
be of anything I had seen. It was kind of the
culmination of my career. I had done elements and
components of plans in various cities and at
various times, but never had I had the two and a half
years to do all of the components for one
community. And I was able to do that and able to
apply some of the newer ideas about how to
communicate, how to do a plan that was
understandable, manageable, dealt with enough
issues, but not too many issues, manageable in
that sense, and put these plans together in a
format where people could see these
interrelationships and linkages between these
elements. which is a challenge to us. It's a
challenge I'm not sure the profession has been
able to respond to. Technically, it was just
outstanding. You know, it just destroyed me to
have to walk away from it and to see it not be
accepted. But I recognized I had to do that. The man
who was city manager, the man who is manager, is
boss. And he was the boss, and he was opposed to
these things. I think the most disappointing
thing was that toward the last year I worked in that
program, I had asked not to do it. because of some of
the rejections I received from him on earlier
elements, I had tried to get off of that and say,
hey, let someone else do this. Or let's not do these
elements, because the manager doesn't want them.
And this is a mistake. And the planning director,
who at that time was
Larry Winger was, in essence, the assistant
director. Gosh, I can't remember his name. It's a
Mexican-American fellow who was the planning
director. And he met with the manager, and the
manager was adamant that he wanted a plan. He would
use the plan. And I had given him an outline of what
the plan was, and he was committing to that
outline. And I told the planning director, I said,
from my discussions I've had with the manager
earlier here, this does not represent what he
wants to do. This is a mistake to do a plan like this.
And the planning director said, no, he was... He
was committed to it. He wanted to do it. He wanted
that plan. And so we did it. And that was a profit
fulfilled, unfortunately. The manager came back
and reacted exactly like I knew he would do.
Okay. Okay. Well, thank you very much. All right.